Initial MP OpenTelemetry Tracing (#89)
eclipse/microprofile-sandbox: proposals/open-telemetry/microprofile-opentelemetry-tracing.asciidoc

:authors: Roberto Cortez
:email: radcortez@yahoo.com
:version-label!:
:sectanchors:
:doctype: book
:license: Eclipse Foundation Specification License v1.0
:source-highlighter: coderay
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:sectnumlevels: 4
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:pagenums:
endif::[]

= Eclipse MicroProfile OpenTelemetry Tracing

== Introduction

TODO

== Rationale

TODO

== Architecture

> This specification defines an easy way to allow an application running in a MicroProfile container to take advantage of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification defines an easy way to allow an application running in a cloud native container to take advantage of
```

distributed tracing by using the https://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry project] (a merger of the OpenTracing and
OpenCensus projects).

This document and implementations *MUST* comply with the following OpenTelemetry specifications:

- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/overview.md[OpenTelemetry Overview]
(except for Metrics)
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md[Tracing API]
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/baggage/api.md[Baggage API]
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/context[Context API]
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md[Resource SDK]

> 

Author: Not sure if this adds any value because the modes are added next. Plus, we need to discuss if we will support a third mode: Agent Instrumentation.

> 

Reviewer: We discussed on today's call. For the agent instrumentation, this might be implementation detail. For the 1st release, we should keep it simple for now.

> 

Author: While we can omit it from the spec, there is not much to be done at the spec level than to just say that MP OTel needs to behave nicely if an OTel Agent is plugged in and probably require to not double the spans added by the Agent.

OTel Agent instrumentation is the most accepted way to add OTel integration into your applications. Typical monitoring tools like New Relic or Datadog rely on the Agent to transparently monitor applications without requiring code changes. I believe this is a too big use case to ignore.

> 

Author: Will handle this in a separate PR.

=== Automatic Instrumentation

JAX-RS applications, JAX-RS Clients, and MicroProfile REST Clients are automatically enlisted to participate in

> distributed tracing without code modification.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to specify how to use the `SpanKind`?  The default span kind is just `Internal`.  Without a standard set of span attributes, do we expect implementation from different vendors can create spans to form a single trace?

Author: The `SpanKind` and span attributes are specified in the OTel semantic conventions: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions. 

This is referred in https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-sandbox/pull/89/files#diff-104c86912f426a8304aea09399aeb4822f91b34e0fb5ea7616c9740faf377925R162

Author: Added link to the Semantic Conventions section.

> 

Reviewer 3: Could you explain why we need to make this distinction?

> 

Author: > Could you explain why we need to make this distinction?

The intent is that anything related to REST (and users can interact with REST through JAX-RS Server, JAX-RS Clients and MP REST Client) is automatically traced without additional code. I list all the options, so it is clear which places support the automatic instrumentation.

> 

Author: > Suggested change 
> Correct parent child relationships between incoming requests and outgoing requests are handled automatically, as long as the outgoing requests occur on the same thread as the incoming request. If outgoing requests are performed on a different thread than the incoming request, it is the developers responsibility to propagate the Tracer context between threads.

I believe this is not required, because it is already covered by the OTel specification.

> 

Reviewer 3: > > Could you explain why we need to make this distinction?
> 
> The intent is that anything related to REST (and users can interact with REST through JAX-RS Server, JAX-RS Clients and MP REST Client) is automatically traced without additional code. I list all the options, so it is clear which places support the automatic instrumentation.

Sorry, @radcortez. That question was for @Emily-Jiang. :)

> 

Reviewer: I think it is nice for this clarification.

> 

Reviewer: In today's call, we agreed that adding the link to the OpenT spec is helpful.

> 

Author: Which link? There is only text in this suggestion.

BTW, I believe this text is not correct (I know it was copied from the MP OpenTracing spec, and is not correct there either). What establishes parent-child relationships is the traceId sitting in the OTel Context. There are situations where you may have the same thread handling the request and response and the OTel Context being different.

In my opinion, we should just link to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#span (which explains how the relationship between parent and child is established), but this is just a subsection of the Trace API already linked in the Architecture section.

> 

Author: Added link to the Trace API in this section, which contains the rules to establish the parent - child relationships.

==== @WithSpan

Annotating a method in any Jakarta CDI aware beans with the `io.opentelemetry.extension.annotations.WithSpan`
annotation. This will create a new Span and establish any required relationships with the current Trace context.

Method parameters can be annotated with the `io.opentelemetry.extension.annotations.SpanAttribute` annotation to
indicate which method parameters should be part of the Trace.

Example:
[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
class SpanBean {
    @WithSpan
    void span() {

    }

    @WithSpan("name")
    void spanName() {

    }

    @WithSpan(kind = SERVER)
    void spanKind() {

    }

    @WithSpan
    void spanArgs(@SpanAttribute(value = "arg") String arg) {

    }
}
----

==== Obtain a SpanBuilder

By obtaining a `SpanBuilder` from the current `Tracer` and calling
`io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer.spanBuilder(String)`. In this case, it is the developer's responsibility to ensure
that the `Span` is properly created, closed, and propagated.

Example:
[source,java]
----
@RequestScoped
@Path("/")
public class SpanResource {
    @Inject
    Tracer tracer;

    @GET
    @Path("/span/new")

>     public Response spanNew() {

Reviewer 2: This example is a bit confusing.  The automatic JAX-RS tracing will create a span for `/span/new`.  Any new span created under a current span will be a child of the current span by default.  We will end up having 2 spans here.  Is this the intent?

Author: Yes. This is just an example if the user wants to create a new `Span` (and not reuse the current one). I can clarify the text.

        Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("span.new")
                .setSpanKind(INTERNAL)
                .setParent(Context.current().with(this.span))
                .setAttribute("my.attribute", "value")
                .startSpan();

        span.end();

        return Response.ok().build();
    }
}
----

==== Obtain the current Span

By obtaining the current `Span` to add attributes. The Span lifecycle is managed by the implementation.

Example:
[source,java]
----
@RequestScoped
@Path("/")
public class SpanResource {
    @Inject

>     Span span;

Reviewer 2: The current span can be obtained from `Span.current()`.  Do we still need inject it?

Author: A CDI Producer would just call `Span.current()`. The idea was just to align with the usual CDI programming model. We can remove that requirement and just use the static method calls to get the OTel objects.

Reviewer: We discussed on today's call. We think calling `Span.current()` is simplier. Are you ok to update the example to reflect that?

Author: Is this just for the example, or do we want to drop the ability the `Span` with CDI?

Author: Added both programatic and CDI  example. Clarified that the OTel programmatic API can also be used.

    @GET
    @Path("/span/current")
    public Response spanCurrent() {
        span.setAttribute("my.attribute", "value");
        return Response.ok().build();
    }
}
----

=== Agent Instrumentation

TODO

=== Access to the OpenTelemetry Tracing API

> Contextual instances of the following OpenTelemetry Tracing API, must be obtained through Jakarta CDI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implemention of MicroProfile OpenTelemetry must provide the following CDI beans for supporting contextual instance injection:
```

(excluding properties related to Metrics).
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/manual-instrumentation.md[Manual Instrumentation]

An implementation may opt to not support a subset of configuration properties related to a specific configuration. For
instance, `otel.traces.exporter` is required but if the implementation does not support `jaeger` as a valid exporter,
then all configuration properties referring to `otel.tracer.jaeger.*` are not required.

=== Semantic Conventions

The https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions[Trace Semantic Conventions]
for Spans and Attributes must be followed by any compatible implementation.

All attributes marked as `required` must be present in the context of the Span where they are defined. Any other
attribute is optional. Implementations can also add their own attributes.

==== MicroProfile Attributes

Other MicroProfile specifications can add their own attributes under their own attribute name following the
convention `mp.[specification short name].[attribute name]`.

== MicroProfile OpenTracing

> MicroProfile OpenTelemetry Tracing is the replacement for MicroProfile OpenTracing. Even if the end goal is the same,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MicroProfile OpenTelemetry Tracing supercedes MicroProfile OpenTracing. Even if the end goal is the same,
```

there are some considerable differences:

- Different API (between OpenTracing and OpenTelemetry)

> - No `@Tracer` annotation

Reviewer 2: Should be `@Traced`

                .setParent(Context.current().with(this.span))
                .setAttribute("my.attribute", "value")
                .startSpan();

        span.end();

        return Response.ok().build();
    }
}
----

NOTE: Start and end a new `Span` will add a child `Span` to the current one enlisted by the automatic instrumentation
of Jakarta REST Applications.

==== Obtain the current Span

By obtaining the current `Span` to add attributes. The Span lifecycle is managed by the implementation.

Example:
[source,java]
----
@RequestScoped
@Path("/")
public class SpanResource {
    @Inject
    Span span;

    @GET
    @Path("/span/current")
    public Response spanCurrent() {
        span.setAttribute("my.attribute", "value");
        return Response.ok().build();
    }
}
----

=== Agent Instrumentation

TODO

=== Access to the OpenTelemetry Tracing API

The implemention of MicroProfile OpenTelemetry must provide the following CDI beans for supporting contextual instance injection:

- `io.opentelemetry.api.OpenTelemetry`
- `io.opentelemetry.api.baggage.Baggage`
- `io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span`
- `io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer`

=== Configuration

> OpenTelemetry must be configured by MicroProfile Config following the configuration properties detailed in:

Reviewer 4: We should list the properties from opentelemetry that we must support in the integration with MP Config and make sure we have tests for that. To make sure the bridge between MP Config and the underlying OT infra.  
We should add a TODO for that.

Author: My idea was just to support everything detailed in the OTel docs, with the option to skip specific configurations related to an exporter. For instance, if the implementation does not support the Jaeger Exporter for some reason, then of course the related Jaeger configuration is also not supported.

Reviewer 4: Ok, but then we need to lock one version of OTel and implement all the property mappings with MP Config, no?

Reviewer: We need to lock down which version of OTel we are aligning with and provide the relevant MP Config properties for the configurations we plan to do. I think adding todo at this stage might be a better way forward.

Author: This will be locked down of course. We need to use the OTel API for the TCK, which is tied to a version and the docs and specs are also tied to a version. On the link, instead of referring to `main` we just refer to the version we use.

Reviewer 4: sounds good

Author: Lockdown OTel version and updated links.

- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure[OpenTelemetry SDK Autoconfigure]
(excluding properties related to Metrics).
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/manual-instrumentation.md[Manual Instrumentation]

> An implementation may opt to not support a subset of configuration properties related to a specific configuration. For

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An implementation may opt to not support a subset of configuration properties related to a specific configuration. However, a bridge between MP Config and the [DefaultConfigProperties ](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/autoconfigure/DefaultConfigProperties.java) must be provided. For
```

Author: I'm not sure if we should go into the implementation details. Of course, this is the obvious way to do it, but maybe other implementations may want to do it differently, and this may be a limiting factor.

Reviewer 4: Otherwise how do you suggest we bridge the configs of both worlds? I think we need to be more precise

Reviewer: I think adding `todo` to evaluate the bridge between MP Config and OTel Config might be a way forward at this stage.

Author: For instance, the default OTel implementation also reads values from `System.getProperties`, so another possible way to implement is to iterate the MP Config keys on init and call a `System.setProperty`. Yes, in a way you have a bridge, but an indirect one. 

It is ok to say that a bridge is required, I just want to avoid referencing OTel classes directly into the spec.

Reviewer 4: sounds good to me just saying the bridge is required
